.TH "ESQ" "1" "July 2019" "" ""

.SH "NAME
\fBesq\R \- Elasticsearch Query Tool
.

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBesq\fR \fIquery\fR
.
.P
\fBesq\fR tranforms SQL-like queries into curl commands
suitable for elasticsearch. Supporting simple filters and
aggregations. For example, \fB esq 'SELECT DISTINCT "price"
FROM "cars" ON HOST "my-host:9200"'\fR will output a query to
select the distinct prices from all documents on an index
named "cars" on an elastisearch host at  "my-host:9200". The
query language is documented in the \fIQUERY LANGUAGE\fR
section.
.
.P
Since \fBesq\fR outputs curl invocations, any \fBesq\fR can be
piped or copied into a remote or local shell where curl is
installed. Idiomatic uses are documented in the \fICONNECTING
TO ELASTICSEARCH\fR section. Any \fBesq\fR can be executed immediately by piping to \fBsh\fR.
For example, \fB esq 'SELECT FROM cars WHERE price < 10000' | sh\fR.
.
.SH "QUERY LANGUAGE"
.
.SS "SELECT"
.P
The simplest query \fBesq\fR does is selection without any parameters. 
.
.IP "" 4
.nf
esq 'SELECT'
=> selects some twenty items from any index, using localhost:9200 as the URL.
.fi
.
.IP "" 0
.
.SS "FROM"
.
.P
Selections can be narrowed down to an index by adding \fBFROM\fR \fIindex\fR to the query. Wildcards can be used to
select multiple indexes.
.IP "" 4
.nf
esq 'SELECT FROM cars'
=> selects twenty items from the "cars" index.
esq 'SELECT FROM "c*"'
=> selects twenty items from any index starting with c.
=> Note that index names with non alpha-numeric characters must be quoted.
esq 'SELECT price FROM cars'
=> selects just the price field for documents in the cars index.
.fi
.
.SS "LIMIT"
\fBLIMIT\fR can be used to control the number of items returned by a query.
.IP "" 4
.nf
esq 'SELECT FROM cars LIMIT 100'
=> select 100 items from cars
.fi
.IP "" 0
.
.SS "WHERE ..."
.P
\fBWHERE\fR can be used to narrow down queries. Simple comparison operators are
supported. Boolean operators and parenthesis can be used to chain filters operations.
.
.IP "" 4
.nf
esq 'SELECT FROM cars WHERE (price < 5000 OR price > 50000) AND "make" != "Toyota" AND year = 2015'
=> filters cars down by price and make. Note that field names may or may not be quoted.
.fi
.IP "" 0
.SS "AGGREGATIONS"
.P

.IP "" 4
.nf
esq 'SELECT DISTINCT make, year FROM cars WHERE year < 2015'
=> get unique make/year combinations for all cars where year is less than < 2015
esq 'SELECT DISTINCT make, year FROM cars WHERE year < 2015'
=> the same query, but count the buckets instead of returning them
.fi
.IP "" 0
.SH "CONNECTING TO ELASTICSEARCH"
Outputting curl commands allows \fBesq\fR to connect to elasticsearch in a variety of ways.
.
.SS "connecting to a locally running elasticsearch"
.
If elasticsearch is running locally, pipe the output of \fBesq\fR into \fBsh\fR
.
.SS "connecting over SSH"
If the host running elasticsearch is accessible over SSH, theoutput of \fBesq\fR can be piped directly
the \fBssh\fR command. Alternatively, using ssh
port-forwarding and the method from "connecting to a locally running elasticsearch" works.
.
.
.SH "AUTHOR"
Lee Avital \fBleeavital@gmail.com\fR.
